并查集 Disjoint Set (Union find)
并查集是一种树形的数据结构， 用于处理不相交集的合并(union)及查询(find)问题。
find：确定元素属于哪一个子集。可以用来确定两个元素是否属于同一个子集。
union：将两个子集合并成同一个集合。
/*模板*/
class DSU{
    vector<int> parent;
    public DSU(int N){
        parent = vector<int>(N);
        for(int i = 0; i < N; i++>)
            parent[i] = i;
    }
    int find(int x){
        if(parent[x] != x) parent[x] = find(parent[x]);
        return parent[x];
    }
    public void union(int x, int y){
        parent[find(x)] = find(y);
    }
}

/**/
[LeetCode] 305. Number of Islands II 岛屿的数量之二
A 2d grid map of m rows and n columns is initially filled with water. We may perform an addLand operation which turns the water at position (row, col) into a land. Given a list of positions to operate, count the number of islands after each addLand operation. An island is surrounded by water and is formed by connecting adjacent lands horizontally or vertically. You may assume all four edges of the grid are all surrounded by water.

Example:
Input: m = 3, n = 3, positions = [[0,0], [0,1], [1,2], [2,1]]
Output: [1,1,2,3]
Explanation:
Initially, the 2d grid grid is filled with water. (Assume 0 represents water and 1 represents land).
0 0 0
0 0 0
0 0 0
Operation 1: addLand(0, 0) turns the water at grid[0][0] into a land.
1 0 0
0 0 0   Number of islands = 1
0 0 0
Operation 2: addLand(0, 1) turns the water at grid[0][1] into a land.
1 1 0
0 0 0   Number of islands = 1
0 0 0
Operation 3: addLand(1, 2) turns the water at grid[1][2] into a land.
1 1 0
0 0 1   Number of islands = 2
0 0 0
Operation 4: addLand(2, 1) turns the water at grid[2][1] into a land.
1 1 0
0 0 1   Number of islands = 3
0 1 0
Follow up:
Can you do it in time complexity O(k log mn), where k is the length of the positions?

class Solution {
public:
    vector<vector<int>> dirs{{-1,0},{1,0},{0,-1},{0,1}};
    vector<int> numIslands2(int m, int n, vector<vector<int>>& positions) {
        vector<int> res;
        DSU dsu(m*n);
        int count = 0;
        vector<bool> isIsland(m * n, false);
        for(auto &pos : positions){
            if(isIsland[pos[0] * n + pos[1]){
                res.push_back(count);
                continue;
            }
            isIsland[pos[0] * n + pos[1]] = true;
            count++;
            for(auto dir : dirs){
                int x = pos[0] +  dir[0], y = pos[1] + dir[1];
                if(x < 0 || x >= m || y < 0 || y >= n || !isIsland[x][y]) continue;
                int component1 = dsu.find(pos[0] * n + pos[1]);
                int component2 = dsu.find(x*n + y);
                if(component1 != component2){
                    dsu.union(component1, component2);
                    count--;
                }
            }
            res.push_back(count);
        }
        return res;
    }
private:
    class DSU{
        vector<int> parent;
        public DSU(N){
            parent = vector<int>(N);
            for(int i = 0; i < N; ++i) parent[i] = i;
        }
        int find(int x){
            if(parent[x] != x) parent[x] = find(x);
            return parent[x];
        }
        public void union(int x, int y){
            parent[find(x)] = find(y);
        }
    }
};